---
layout: post
title: Notes on 1491 Chapter 1
categories: blog
tags: standard
date: May 31, 2016
---

<h3>Chapter 1: A View From Above</h3>
<br>
<b>In the Beni</b>



*	Beni is a Bolivian province in South America

*	Clark Erickson and William Balée are scholars that challenge the notion that Indians before Columbus were settled and non-nomadic

*	William Denevan’s “the pristine myth” – the belief that the Americas in 1491 were an almost untouched, even Edenic land

*	The Wilderness Act of 1964 states that the Americas was “untrammeled by man” before Europeans

*	Cutting brazil-nut trees is illegal—the trees need to be pollinated by orchid bees (Euglossine bees), which cannot thrive in Acre’s deforested cattle grassland. 

*	Ranches spray clouds of African grass seed across Acre to prevent trees from growing. African grass grows into thick-bladed springy carpet.


<br>
<b>Holmberg’s Mistake</b>

*	Triplarsis americana plays host to colonies of tiny red ants. The ants occupy minute tunnels underneath the bark. In exchange for shelter, the ants protect the tree by attacking anything that touches it.

*	Ibibate is a fifty-nine feet of forested mound. The pieces of ceramic help in aerating the muddy soil for settlement and agriculture.

*	The Sironós occupy the Beni. Their population is small and they are often born with slight mutations (such as nick in their ears) because the genetic pool is limited.

*	Between 1940 and 1942, Allen R. Holmberg lived among the Sironós. He published his findings, an account of their lives, Nomads of the Longbow. This book became one of the main reference and image for South American Indians.

*	Holmberg reported that the Sironós were “among the most culturally backwards peoples of the world.”

*	When Holmberg met the Sironós, the population was around 150. Before the epidemic hit the Sironós , their population totaled to 3,000.

*	In 1961, William Denevan, a doctoral student came to Bolivia. He heard from oil-company geologists that the Beni was thick with the remains of an unknown civilization.

*	He decided to study the Beni from above. He saw isolated hillocks of forest; long raised berms; canals; raised agricultural fields; circular, moat-like ditches; and odd zigzagging ridges

*	Erickson believes that 3,000 years ago, the ancestors of Arawak-speaking people now called the Mojo and the Bauré founded this civilization. They created one of the largest, strangest, and most ecologically rich-artificial environments.

*	Holmberg’s Mistake explained what the colonists wanted to believe and see about the Indians. 

*	Positive or negative, Holmberg’s mistake showed Indians having a lack of agency—that these tribes were not actors on their own right, but passive recipients of whatever windfalls or disasters happenstance puts on their way.

*	Henry David Thoreau sought “Indian wisdom” because he believed that Indians did little to change nature or landscape. He wanted to live this way, a primitive way. 

*	In 1970, a grassroots organization named Keep America Beautiful, Inc. used Thoreau’s principles and publicized their belief using an ad with an Indian crying over a polluted land. 

*	These beliefs still embody Holmberg’s Mistake that Indians are not accountable for their land or people who never changed their environment.

*	Writer Francis Fitzgerald claimed that the characterization of Indians “if anything, resolutely moved backward” between 1840s and 1940s

*	They froze them into formula “lazy, childlike, cruel”

*	Aflred W. Crosby, a professor at the University of Texas noted that many of the researchers who embraced Holmber’s Mistake lived in an era when the driving force of events seemed to be great leaders of European descent and when white societies appeared to be overwhelming nonwhite societies everywhere

<br>
<b>The Other Neolithic Revolution</b>

*	The shallow Bering Strait became a wide land bridge between Siberia and Alaska. 

*	C. Vance Haynes noted that 13,000 years ago, two great glacial sheets in northwest Canada parted, leaving a comparatively warm, ice-free corridor between them.

*	Down this channel, paleo-Indians could have passed fro Alaska to the more habitable regions in the south without having to hike over the ice pack.

*	The combination of land bridge and ice-free corridor occurred only once in the last twenty years, and lasted just a few hundred years

*	Paleo-Indians left Eurasia before the first whisper of the Neolithic Revolution.

*	The Neolithic Revolution is the invention of farming, an event whose significance can hardly be overstated. 

*	Another Neolithic Revolution occurred in Mesoamerica 10,000 years ago

*	In 2003, archaeologists discovered ancient seeds from cultivated squashes in coastal Ecuador, at the foot of the Andes, which maybe older than any agricultural remains in Mesoamerica

*	The first recorded use of the number “0” in the Americas occurred in a Maya carving from 357 A.D. possibly before the Sanskrit.

*	What is most important is that by 1,000 A.D. Indians had expanded their Neolithic revolutions to create panoply of diverse civilizations across the hemisphere.


<br>
<b>A Guided Tour</b>

*	The state closest to the Beni was based around Lake Titicaca

*	The village of Tiwanuku began after 800 B.C. to drain the wetlands around the rivers that flowed into the lake from the south

*	Alan L. Kolata excavated at Tiwanuku during the 1980s and early 1990s. He has written that by 1000 A.D. the city had a population as much as 115,000 with another quarter million in the surrounding countryside

*	North and west of Tiwanuku, in what is now southern Peru was the rival state of Wari

*	In 1000 A.D. both Tiwanuku and Wai were reeling from a succession of terrible droughts

*	Mega Niños occurred every few centuries between 200 an 1600 A.D.

*	Fierce winters helped drive the Vikings from Greenland and led to bad harvests that exacerbated social tensions in continental Europe—this attributed to the rise and fall of European states

*	Soon after 1000 A.D. Tiwanuku split into flinders that would not be united for another four centuries, when the Inka swept them up

*	Calakmul has the biggest-ever Maya polity (civil government).

*	Kaan, the Kingdom of Snake was the focus of devastating war that convulsed the Maya city-state for more than a century

*	Kaan is just one the score of Maya settlements that in the last few decades have been investigated for the first time

*	The archaeological records shows that southern Yucatán was abandoned, while Maya cities in the northern part of the peninsula soldiered on or even grew

*	The question is why people would have fled from drought to lands that would have been more badly affected.

*	The Toltec were sweeping in every direction from the mile-high basin that today houses Mexico City.

*	King Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl was forced out of his long ruling in 987 A.D.

*	He fled with boatloads of loyalists to Yucatán

*	Quetzalcoatl had apparently conquered the Maya city of Chichén Itzá and was rebuilding it in his own Toltec image.

*	By 1000 A.D., trade relationships had covered the continent for more than a thousand years; mother-of-pearl from the Gulf of Mexico has been found in Manitoba, and Lake Superior copper in Louisiana. 


